why are we interested in how much the
CIA knew about drug traffic who was
profiting from this drug traffic who
else knew about and why did it take some
guy in at a California newspaper by
accident stumbling over this stuff ten
years later to ever get it to be both
one the hell's going on I've been a
reporter like I said almost 20 years to
me this is an actual story CIA's
involved drug trafficking let's let's
know about it let's find out about let's
do something about it nobody wants it
consciously that's Gary Webb and this is
alternative radio this edition of a are
features Gary Webb on Dark Alliance the
CIA crack cocaine connection the CIA was
involved in drug trafficking in the mid
1980s how did that happen one
questionable decision at a time
accomplices eventually included the
House Intelligence Committee the Justice
Department and then Vice President
George Bush all who either passed the
buck or ignored reports of illegal
activity an agreement reached in 1982
with the attorney general's office
exempted reporting CIA drug trafficking
media coverage of the CIA contra drug
connection exemplifies a brand of lapdog
journalism that simply prints government
statements without verification Gary
Webb a veteran journalist with 20 years
experience broke the CIA crack cocaine
story in the San Jose Mercury News web
and his editors were subjected to harsh
criticism and denials from those who
didn't want the information made public
and the mainstream media that didn't
cover it Mercury news editors then
backed off from the story and
effectively silenced web through
demotions to this day nobody has ever
claimed there was a factual error in his
reporting the results of three years of
research on this issue are found in his
book Dark Alliance Gary Webb spoke
before a large audience in Eugene Oregon
I do not believe and I've never believed
that the crack cocaine explosion was a
conscious CIA conspiracy
or anybody's conspiracy to decimate
black America I've never believed that
South Central Los Angeles was targeted
by the US government to become the crack
capital of the world
but that isn't to say that the CIA's
hands or the US government's hands are
clean in this matter actually far from
it you know after spending three years
of my life looking into this I am more
convinced than ever that the US
government's responsibility for the drug
problems in South Central Los Angeles
and other inner cities is greater than I
ever wrote in the newspaper but I think
it's important to differentiate between
malign intent and gross negligence you
know and that's an important distinction
because it's what makes premeditated
murder different from manslaughter that
said it doesn't change the fact that
you've got a body on the floor and
that's what I want to talk about tonight
is the body and what I've attempted to
demonstrate was how the collapse of a
brutal pro-american dictatorship in
Latin America combined with a decision
by corrupt CIA agents to raise money for
a resistance movement by any means
necessary led to the formation of the
nation's first major crack market in
South Central Los Angeles which led to
the arming and the empowerment of LA
Street gangs which led to the spread of
crack to black neighborhoods across the
country
and the passage of racially
discriminatory sentencing laws that are
locking up thousands of young black men
today behind bars for most of their
adult lives but it's not so much of
conspiracy as it is a chain reaction so
let me explain the links in this chain a
little better the first link is this
fellow Anastasio Somoza who was a
american-educated tyrant one of our
buddies naturally and his family ruled
Nicaragua for 40 years thanks to the
Nicaraguan National Guard which we
supplied we armed and funded because we
thought they were you know
anti-communists well in 1979 the people
of Nicaragua got tired of living under
this dictatorship and they rose up they
overthrew and a lot of Somozas friends
and relatives and business part
came to the United States because we had
been their allies for all these years
including two men whose families have
been very close to the dictatorship and
these two guys are sort of the two of
the three main characters fellow named
Danilo Blandon and a fellow named Norwin
Meneses they came the United States in
79 along with the flood of other
Nicaraguan immigrants most of them
middle class people most of them you
know former bankers former insurance
salesmen it was sort of a sort of a
capitalist exodus from Nicaragua and
they got involved when they got here and
they decided they were going to take
their country back they didn't like the
fact they've been kicked out of their
country so they formed these resistance
organizations here in the United States
and began plotting on how they were
going to how they're going to kick the
Sandinistas out and at this point in
time Jimmy Carter was president and
Carter wasn't all that interested in
helping these folks out the CIA was
however and that's that's where we start
getting into this murky world of you
know who really runs the United States
is it the president is it the
bureaucracy is it the intelligence
community and at different points in
time you get different answers but the
idea that like today we have this
controversy with Clint the idea that
Clinton runs the United States is nuts
the idea that Jimmy Carter ran the
country is nuts in in 1979 1980 the CIA
secretly began visiting these groups
that were setting up here in United
States and supplying them a little bit
of money and tell him to hold on wait
for a little while don't give up and
Ronald Reagan came to town and Ronald
Reagan have a very different outlook on
Central America that Carter did Reagan
saw what happened in Nicaragua not as a
populist uprising as most of the rest of
the world did he saw them as this band
of Communists down there was going to be
another Fidel Castro and he was going to
have he was going to have another you
know another Cuba in his backyard which
fit in very well with the CIA is
thinking so the CIA and the Reagan
administration got together said we're
going to help these
and they authorized 19 million dollars
to fund a covert war to destabilize the
new government of Nicaragua and and help
get their old buddies back in power so
soon after the CIA took over this
operation these two drug traffickers who
would come from Nicaragua and settled in
California were called down to Honduras
and they met with a CIA agent named
Enrique Bermudez who was one of Somozas
military officials and the man of the
CIA had picked to run this new
organization they were forming and both
traffickers have said one under one of
them said is under oath has never been
contradicted when they met with the CIA
agent he told them we need money for
this operation your guys job is to go to
California and raise money and not to
worry about how you did it and what he
said and I think these words have been
used to justify just about every crime
against humanity that we've known the
ends justify the means now this is a
very important link in this chain
reaction because the means they selected
was cocaine trafficking which is sort of
what you'd expect when you ask cocaine
traffickers to go out and raise money
for you you shouldn't be awfully
surprised when they go out and sell
drugs especially when you pick people
who are like pioneers of the cocaine
trafficking business which Norwin
Meneses certainly was there was a CIA
cable from I believe in 1984 that called
him the kingpin of narcotics trafficking
in Central America it was sort of like
the Al Capone of Nicaragua so after
getting these fundraising instructions
from this CIA agent these two men came
back to California and they began
selling cocaine this time not
exclusively for themselves this time in
furtherance of u.s. foreign policy and
they began selling in Los Angeles and
they began selling in San Francisco when
Danilo Blandon went down to South
Central to start selling this dope he
was he had an MBA in marketing so he
knew what he was doing
job in the Somoza government was setting
up wholesale markets for agricultural
products he'd received an MBA thanks to
us actually we helped finance we helped
send him to the University of Bogota to
get his MBA so he could go back to
Nicaragua and actually come in United
States and sell dope to the gangs so
this is a very sophisticated operation I
mean there were other people one of the
one of the money launderers for this
group was a macro economist his uncle
Orlando motor yo he was on the Central
Bank of Nicaragua the weapons advisor
they had was a guy I've been a cop for
15 years then another weapons advisor
has been a Navy SEAL you don't get these
kind of people by putting ads in the
paper you know this is not a drug ring
that just sort of falls together by
chance this is like an all-star game and
which is which is why I suspect more and
more that this thing was set up by you
know a higher authority than a couple of
drug dealers now sometime in 1982 Danilo
Blandon who had been given the LA market
started selling his cocaine to a young
drug dealer named Ricky Ross who would
later become known as freeway Rick
in 1994 the LA Times would describe him
as the master marketer most responsible
for flooding the streets of Los Angeles
with cut-rate cocaine in 1979 he was
nothing he was nothing until he met
these Nicaraguans he was a high school
dropout he was a kid that wanted to be a
tennis star and was trying to get a
tennis scholarship but found out that
you know in order to get a college
scholarship you needed to read and write
and he couldn't so he drifted out of
school and wound up you know selling
stolen car parts and he met these
Nicaraguans who had this cheap cocaine
they wanted to unload and he proved too
very good at that now he lived in South
Central Los Angeles which was home to
some Street games known as the Crips and
the Bloods and back in 1981-82
hardly anybody knew who they were
they were mainly you know there were
neighborhood gangs they'd beat each
other up they'd steal other codes they'd
steal cars but they were there really
nothing back then but what they gave
this organization and what they gave
Ricky Ross was a built-in distribution
network through that neighborhood I mean
the Crips and the Bloods were already
selling marijuana they were already
selling PCP so it wasn't much of a
stretch for them to sell something new
which is what these what these
Nicaragua's are bringing in which was
cocaine and now this is where this is
where these sort of forces of history
you know come out of nowhere and collide
right at the time the Contras got to LA
South Central Los Angeles and hooked up
with freeway Rick and started selling
powder cocaine the people Rick was
selling his powder to started asking him
if he knew how to make it into this
stuff called rock that they were hearing
about and rock was something it was on
its way the United States by then it
started in Peru and 74 and was working
its way up and it was bound to get here
sooner or later and in 1981 it got to
Los Angeles and people start figuring
out it take these very expensive powder
cocaine and hook it up on the stove and
turn it into stuff you could smoke but
when Ricky went out and he started
talking to his customers and they
started asking him did he know how to
make this stuff no Rick was a smart guy
still is a smart guy and he figured this
is something new this is something you
know this is customer demand and if I
want to progress in this business I'm in
to better meet this demand and so he
started switching from selling powder to
making rock himself and selling it
already made and he called this new
invention of his ready rock whereas the
customers and he told me this interview
said you know he said it was a situation
where I go to a guy's house and he'd say
oh man I want to get high on my way to
work and I don't have time to go to the
kitchen and cook this stuff up can't you
cook it up for me and just bring it to
me already made
Rick's again I can do that and you know
we started doing so by the time crack
got hold in South Central which took a
couple of years Rick had positioned
himself on top of the
back market in south-central and by 1984
crack sales had supplanted marijuana and
PCP sales as sources of income for the
for the gangs the drug dealers in
south-central and suddenly these guys
had more money and they know what to do
with because what what happened with
crack is it democratized the drug when
you were buying it in powder form you
were having to lay out a hundred bucks
for a gram or 250 bucks for a gram now
all you needed was ten bucks
or five bucks or a dollar they were
selling dollar rocks at some point so
anybody that had money and wanted to get
high could get this stuff you didn't
need to be a middle-class or wealthy
drug user anymore
and suddenly the market for this very
expensive drug expanded geometrically
and now these dealers who were making
you know 100 bucks a day on a good day
we're now making five and six thousand
dollars a day on a good day and the
gangs started setting up franchises they
started franchising rock houses in South
Central
just like McDonald's and you would go on
streets and there would be five or six
rock houses owned by one guy in five or
six rock houses owned by another guy and
suddenly they started making even more
money and now they got they had all this
money and they felt nervous you know you
get you get one hundred two hundred
thousand dollars in cash in your house
you start getting kind of hinky about it
and so then now they wanted weapons to
guard this money with and to guard their
rock houses which other people were
starting to knock off and lo and behold
who had weapons the Contras they were
selling weapons they were buying weapons
and they started selling weapons to the
gangs of Los Angeles started selling
them ar-15s they started selling the
movies they started selling them
israeli-made pistols with laser sights
just about anything because that was
part of the process here they were not
just drug dealers they were taking their
drug money and buying weapons with it to
send down to Central America with the
assistance of a very number of spooky
CIA folks who are getting end-user
certificates and that sort of thing so
they get the weapons and other
so not only did you at south-central
suddenly have a drug problem
they had a weapons problem they never
had before and you started seeing things
like drive-by shootings and gangbangers
with Uzis you know so by 1985 the LA
crack market had become saturated there
was so much dope going into South
Central dope that the CIA we now know
knew of and they knew the origins of the
FBI knew the origins of it the DEA knew
the origins of it and nobody did
anything about it and we'll get into
that in a bit but what happened was
there were so many people selling and
selling crack I mean the dealers were
like jostling each other on the corners
and the smart ones decided they're going
to take this show on the road so they
started going to other cities
they started going to Bakersfield they
started going to Fresno they started
going to San Francisco and Oakland where
they didn't have crack markets and
nobody knew what this stuff was and they
had wide open markets for themselves and
suddenly crack started showing up in
City after City after City and often
times it was Crips and it was Bloods
from Sam from Los Angeles they were
starting these markets by 86 it was all
up and down the East Coast and by 89 it
was nationwide today fortunately crack
use is on a downward trend but that's
not because of any great progress we've
made in the so-called war on drugs it's
the natural cycle of things drug
epidemics generally run from 10 to 15
years now heroin is the latest on the
upswing now you know a lot of people
disagree with this scenario the New York
Times and The Only Times The Washington
Post all came out said oh no that's not
so
they said this couldn't have happened
that way because crack would have
happened anyway
which is true somewhat crack was on its
way here but whether it would have
happened the same way whether would have
happened in South Central
whether would have happened in Los
Angeles at all first is a very different
story you know if they come up and
happen in Eugene Oregon first it may not
have gone any
no offense but it's not exactly you
folks are trendsetters up here when it
comes to drug good drug fads la is
however you know you can you can play
what if games with history all you like
but it doesn't change the reality and
the reality is that this CIA connected
drug ring played a very critical role in
the early 1980s voting up south central
to a crack epidemic that was unmatched
in severity and influence anywhere in
the u.s. now the one question that I ask
people do say oh that's I don't believe
this I say okay tell me this why did
crack appear in black neighborhoods
first why did crack distribution
networks leapfrog from one black
neighborhood to another black
neighborhood and bypass white
neighborhoods and bypass Hispanic
neighborhoods in Asian neighborhoods and
you know our government and our
mainstream media have given us very
varying explanations for this phenomenon
over the years and they're nice
comforting general explanations which
absolve anyone of any responsibility for
why crack is so ethnically specific and
one of the reasons we're told is that
well it's poverty you know as if the
only poor neighborhoods in this country
are black neighborhoods and then we're
told that well it's high teen age
unemployment you know these kids going
to have jobs you know as if the hills
and hollows of Appalachia don't have
teenage unemployment rates that are ten
times higher than that of the inner-city
Los Angeles and then there's then we're
told that it's loose family structure
that you know presuming that there are
no white single mothers out there trying
to raise kids on low-paying jobs or on
welfare and food stamps and then we're
told well it's because crack so cheap as
if it sells for a lower price in South
Central than it does anywhere else I
mean 20 bucks is 20 bucks no matter
where you go in the country so once
you've eliminated these sort of
nonsensical explanations you're left
with two theories I think what you're
far less comfortable which is why we
don't hear about them the first theory
which is not something I personally
subscribe to but it's out there is that
there's something about people in black
neighborhoods is causes them to be
genetically
suppose a drug-trafficking you know
which is a racist argument that no one
in the right mind is advancing publicly
although I tell you when I was reading a
lot of the stories in the Washington
Post's new york times they were talking
about you know black americans were just
more susceptible to conspiracy theories
than white americans which is why they
believe this story of mine i think that
was sort of the underlying current there
i mean the other on the other hand i
didn't see any stories about you know
all the white people to think elvis is
alive still or you know that hitler's
brain has been preserved on a brazil to
wait the fourth reich you know that
which is a particularly white conspiracy
theory i haven't seen any stories in new
york times about that the other the
other unpalatable reason which in my
mind comes closer to the truth is that
someone started bringing cheap cocaine
into black neighborhoods right at the
time you drug users began figuring out
how to turn it to crack and this allowed
black drug dealers to get a head start
on every other ethnic group in terms of
setting up distribution systems and
trafficking systems now the one thing I
learned about about the drug business I
was researching this is that it is in
many ways the epitome of capitalism it
is the purest form of capitalism you
have no government regulation wide open
market buyers market anything goes but
these things don't spring out of the
ground fully formed you know it's like
any business it takes time to grow them
it takes time to set up the networks so
once these distribution networks got set
up and established in primarily South
Central Los Angeles primarily the black
neighborhoods they spread along ethnic
and cultural lines you had black dealers
from LA going to black neighborhoods in
other cities because they knew people
there they had friends there and that's
why you saw these networks pop up from
one black neighbor to another black
neighborhood now exactly the same thing
happened on the East Coast a couple
years later when crack first appeared on
the East Coast it appeared in Caribbean
neighborhoods in Miami thanks largely to
Jamaicans
who were using their drug profits to
fund political gangs back home and it
was almost the exact opposite of
what would happen in LA the politics
were the opposite it was the same it was
the same phenomenon and once the Miami
market was saturated they moved to New
York and they started bringing the crack
habit from the East Coast towards the
middle of the country so it seems to me
that if you're looking for the root of a
drug problem in a neighborhood nothing
else really matters except the drugs and
where they're coming from and how
they're getting there and all those
other reasons I cited rooted
explanations for why crack would become
popular but it doesn't explain how the
cocaine got there in the first place and
that's where the conference came in one
of the things that the these newspapers
had dissed my story were saying was oh
we cannot believe that the CIA would
know about drug trafficking and let it
happen that this you know this idea that
this agency which gives 27 billion
dollars a year to tell us what's going
on and was so intimately involved with
the Contras they were writing their
press releases for them they wouldn't
know about this drug trafficking going
on under their noses but the times and
the post all uncritically reported their
claims that the CIA I didn't know
anything was going on they would never
permit its hirelings
do anything like that is unseemly as
drug traffic you know yeah
assassinations and bombings and that
sort of thing yeah they'll admit to
right up front but drug trafficking ah
no no they don't do that kind of stuff
well unfortunately that wasn't true and
what has happened since my series came
out is that the CIA was forced to do an
internal review the DEA and the Justice
Department was forced to do an internal
review and these agencies have released
these reports that you probably didn't
read about them because they
contradicted everything else these other
newspapers have been writing for the
last couple of years but let me let me
just read you one excerpt from this is a
1987 DEA report and this is about this
drug ring in Los Angeles that I wrote
about
in 1987 the DEA sent an undercover
informant inside this drug operation and
they interviewed one of the principals
of this organization a man named Yvan
Torres and this is what he said he told
the informant quote the CIA wants to
know about drug trafficking but only for
their own purposes and not necessarily
to assist law enforcement agencies
Torres told de a confidential informant
one that CIA representatives are aware
of his drug-related activities and that
they don't mind he said they have gone
so far as to encourage cocaine
trafficking by members of the Contras
because they know it's a good source of
income some of this money has gone into
numbered accounts in Europe and Panama
as does the money that goes to Managua
from cocaine trafficking tourists told
the informant about receiving
counterintelligence training from the
CIA and had avowed that the CIA looks
the other way in an essence allows them
to engage in narcotics trafficking now
this is a DEA report it was written in
1987 when this operation was still going
on another member of this organization
who was affiliated with the San
Francisco end of it said in 1985 and
this was to the CIA Cabezas claimed that
the Contra cocaine enterprise operated
with the knowledge of and under the
supervision of the CIA Cabezas claimed
that this drug enterprise was run with
the knowledge of a CIA agent named Yvan
Gomez now this is one of the stories I
tried to do with the Mercury News was
who this man Yvan Gomez was this is
after my original series came out and
after the controversy started and I went
back down to Central America and I found
this fellow cab ASIS and he told me all
about Yvan Gomez and I came back I
corroborated it with three former contra
officials Mercury News wouldn't put in
the newspaper and they said well we have
no evidence this man even exists well
the CIA inspector general report came
out in October and there was a whole
chapter on Yvan Gomez and the amazing
thing was that Yvan Gomez admitted in a
CIA administered polygraph test that he
had been engaged in laundering drug
money
the same month that this man told me he
had been engaged in it see I knew about
it and what did they do nothing I said
okay go back to work and they covered it
up for that what 15 years so you know
the one the one thing that I've learned
from this whole experience is first of
all you can't believe the government on
anything and you specially can't believe
them when it's talking about the
important stuff like this like this
stuff is the other thing is that the
media will believe the government before
they believe anything this is the this
has been the most amazing thing to me
you had a situation where you had
another newspaper report this
information the major news organization
of this country went to the CIA they
went to the Justice part I said what
about it and I said oh no it's not true
take our word for it and they went back
and put it in the newspaper
now I tried to imagine what would happen
had these reporters come back to their
editors and said look I know the CIA is
involved in drug trafficking and I know
the FBI knows about it and I've got a
confidential source that's telling me
that can I write a story about that what
do you think the answer would have been
get back on the obit desk you know start
cranking out those sports scores but
they go to the government and the
government denies something like that
and they'll put it in the paper without
any corroboration whatsoever and it's
only since it's only since the
government has admitted it now the media
is willing to consider that there might
be a story here after all
the New York Times after the CIA report
came out ran a story as front page
saying gosh the Contras were involved
with drugs after all and gosh the CIA
knew about it now you would think at
least I would think that something like
that would warrant a congressional
investigation why are we interested in
how much the CIA knew about drug
trafficking who was profiting from this
drug trafficking
who else knew about it and why did it
take you know some guy in at a
California newspaper by accident
stumbling over this stuff 10 years later
to ever get it to be public I mean what
won the hell is going on here I mean I
you know honestly I've been a reporter
like I said almost 20 years to me this
is an actual story CIA's involved drug
trafficking let's let's know about it
let's find out about let's do something
about it nobody wants to touch this
thing that's Gary Webb on Dark Alliance
the CIA crack cocaine connection this is
alternative radio you can get copies of
this program by calling the following
toll-free number one eight hundred four
four four 1977 again that number is
1-844-452-4051
and according to the document we didn't
have to report this to anybody and they
said well how come I said well we don't
know exactly but there was an agreement
that was made
1982 between bill Casey a fine American
as we all know and William French Smith
who was then the Attorney General the
United States and they reached some
agreement that said if if there's drug
trafficking involved by CIA agents we
don't have to tell the Justice
Department about it
honest to god honest to god
actually this is now a public record
this document Maxine Waters got copies
of it she's put it on the Congressional
Record it is now on the CIA's website if
you cared a journey into that area if
you do check out the CIA website for
kids it's it's great I love it
Tiana I'm not making it up they actually
got a web page for kids but so what we
had in in essence and the other thing
about this agreement was it wasn't just
like a 30-day agreement this thing
stayed in effect from 1982 until 1995 so
all these years these agencies at a
gentlemen's agreement that if CIA assets
or CIA agents were involved in drug
trafficking it did not need to be
reported the Justice Department so um
you know I think that eliminates any
question that drug trafficking by the
Contras was an accident or that it was a
matter of just a few rotten apples I
think what this says is that it was
anticipated by the Justice Department it
was anticipated by the CIA and steps
were taken to ensure that there was a
loophole in the law so that when it ever
became public knowledge
nobody could be prosecuted for it the
other thing is when George Bush pardoned
remember those Christmas pardons that he
handed out when he was on his way out
the door a couple years ago everybody
focused on media focused all caspar
weinberger got pardoned as in this
terrible well if you look down the list
of names the other pardons he handed out
was a guy named Claire George it was a
guy named Allen fires there's another
guy named Thomas Joe Fernandez and these
stories sort of brushed them off and
said while they were CIA officials and
we're not going to say much more about
it these were the CIA officials were
responsible for the Contra war these are
the men that we're running the Contra
operation and the text of bush's pardon
not only pardons them for the crimes of
iran-contra it pardoned them for
everything so now that we know about it
we can't even do anything about it
they've all received presidential
pardons so where does that leave us well
I think it sort of leaves us to rely on
the judgment of history but that is a
major step now we didn't know about this
stuff two years ago we know about it now
we've got congressmen who were no longer
willing to believe that CIA is honorable
men as William Colby Coulomb and we've
got approximately a thousand pages of
evidence of CIA drug trafficking on the
public record finally now that said let
me tell you there are thousands pages
more that we still don't know about the
CIA report that came out in October was
originally 600 pages by the time we got
a hold of it it was 300 pages one last I
want to mention Bob Perry who is a fine
investigative reporter he runs a
magazine in Washington called if'
magazine and he's got a great website if
you could check it out he did a story
about two weeks ago about some of the
stuff that was contained in the CIA
report that we didn't get to see and one
of the stories he wrote was about how
there was a second CIA drug ring in
South Central Los Angeles that ran from
1988 to 1991 this was not even the one I
wrote about there was another one there
this was classified the interesting
thing is it was run by a CIA agent who
had participated in the Contra war and
the reason it was classified is because
it's under investigation by the CIA I
doubt very seriously we will ever hear
another word about that but you know the
one thing that we can do and the one
thing that Maxine Waters is trying to do
is force the House Intelligence
Committee to hold hearings on this this
is supposed to be the Oversight
Committee the CIA
they have held one hearing and after
they found out there was this deal that
they didn't have to report drug
trafficking they all ran out of the room
and they haven't haven't convened since
so you know if you're interested in
pursuing this the thing I would suggest
to do is call up the House Intelligence
Committee in Washington and ask them
when they're going to have another CIA
Contra crack hearing believe me will
drive them crazy
sent an email just to ask them keep the
keep you know make sure they think
everybody's forgotten about this I mean
if you look around the room and I don't
think I don't think it's been forgotten
they want us to forget about it they
want us to concentrate on sex crimes
because you know it's titillating it it
keeps us occupied keeps us diverted
don't let them do it
thanks very much for attention I
appreciate it and we'll do questions and
answers now for as long as we want the
question was one of George Bush first
know about this the CIA in its latest
report said I think it was 1985 that
they prepared a detailed briefing for
the vice president on all of these
allegations of contra drug trafficking
and delivered it to him personally
so it's hard for Georgia say he's out of
the loop on this one but I'll tell you
another thing one of the one of the most
amazing things I found in the National
Archives was a report that had been
written by the US Attorney's Office in
Tampa I think was 1987 they had just
busted a Colombian drug trafficker named
Alan Rudd and they were using him as a
cooperating witness Rudd had agreed to
go undercover and to set up other drug
traffickers and they were debriefing him
now let me set the stage for you when
you're being debriefed by the federal
government as a uses of an informant
you're not going to go in there and tell
him crazy sounding stories because
they're not going to believe it they're
going to just slap you in jail right
what he told them was that he was
involved in a meeting with Pablo Escobar
who was the then the head of the
Medellin Cartel they were working out
arrangements the scent of cocaine
shipment into South Florida
he said Escobar started ranting and
raving about that damn George Bush and
now he's got that South Florida drug
transport set up which is really making
things difficult for us
and the man is a traitor and he used to
deal with us but now he wants to be
president and he's double-crossing us
and Rudd said what are you talking about
and he said we made a deal with that guy
that we were going to ship weapons to
the Contras they were there flying
weapons down to Colombia we were
unloading the weapons we were getting
them to the Contras and the deal was we
were supposed to get our stuff in the
United States with any problems and I
was a deal we made and now he
double-crossed us so the US Attorney
heard this and he wrote this panicky
memo to Washington saying you know this
man has been very reliable so far
everything he's told us is checked out
and now he's saying the vice president
United States is involved with drug
traffickers we might want to check this
out and it went all the way up in and
that's funny thing about government
documents is whenever it passes over
somebody's desk they have to initial it
and this thing was like a ladder you
know went all the way up all the way up
and it got up to the head of the
Criminal Division of the Justice
Department and he looked at it and he
said looks like a job for Lawrence Walsh
and so he sent it over to Walsh they are
on contra prosecutor and said here you
date you deal with this and when I
interviewed wall she said we didn't have
the authority to deal with that we were
looking at Ollie north so I said did
anybody investigate this and the answer
is no and that thinks been sitting in
the National Archives for ten years
nobody ever looked at it I think I think
George Bush's role in this whole thing
is is one of the large unexplored areas
of it well you know that hold wrote
South Florida Drug Task Force he had was
full of CIA operatives full of them and
this was supposed to be our vanguard you
know on the won the war against cocaine
cartels and if those Colombians are to
be believed this was a vehicle that we
were using the ship arms and allow
cocaine into the country was this drug
task force nobody's looked at that but
there's lots of clues that there's a lot
to be dug out there okay the question is
what about the LAPD and if I saw any
culpability in them I got to tell you
the only cops that tried to do anything
about this drug ring we're the only kind
of Sheriff's Office and they all ended
up being indicted all the cops that were
on this task force that went
this contra drug ring all wound up under
indictment themselves a couple of years
later but by and large local cops were
good on this or I talked to local cops
in San Francisco who tried to do
something about it the DEA was dreadful
the DEA was protecting these guys from
the get-go because a lot of them were
working for him
LAPD you know I talked to a number of
them and it was a street cops who were
seeing what was going on or reporting it
up the chain and then they hit the wall
and I don't think was any conspiratorial
bents what they were told was what are
you talking about
how can people in south-central afford
cocaine why should we be wasting our
time going on drug hunts down a South
Central when all these Colombians and
all these you know Peruvians are running
around with real money you know they
don't have any money down south central
buy drugs with or especially cocaine
because at that point in time you know
it was an expensive drug so the street
cops were seeing it and reporting at the
brass didn't believe it until it was too
late yeah let me sum up your question
essentially you're asking about the
goings-on in Mena Arkansas because there
was a drug operation was going on in
this little airbase in Arkansas when
Clinton was governor down there the
fellow you referred to Terry Reed wrote
a book called compromised which talked
about his role in this in his covert
operation in Mena which was initially
designed to train Contra pilots Reed was
a pilot and it was also designed after
the Boland amendment when no effect to
get arms weapons parts to the Contras
because the CIA couldn't provide him
anymore and as Reed got into this
weapons parts business he discovered
that the CIA was shipping cocaine back
through these weapons crates that were
coming back in the United States and
when he blew the whistle on it he was
sort of sent on to this long Odyssey of
you know criminal charges being filed
against him etc etc etc a lot of what
Reed wrote is accurate as far as I can
tell I mean a lot of it was documented
there is a House Banking Committee
investigation that has been going on now
for about three years looking
specifically at Mena Arkansas looking
specifically at a drug trafficker named
Barry seal who was one of the biggest
cocaine and marijuana importers in the
south southern United States during the
1980s Seale was also coincidentally
working for the CIA
he was also worked with the Drug
Enforcement Administration and I don't
know how many of you remember this but
one night Ronnie Reagan got on TV and
held up of like a grainy picture and
said there's proof that the Sandinistas
are dealing drugs look here's here's
Thomas Bohr hey and here's Pablo Escobar
and they're all loading cocaine into a
plane this was taken in Nicaragua this
was like the eve of before a vote on the
Contra aid that photograph was set up by
Barry seal the plane that was used with
seals plane and it was the same plane
that was shot down over Nicaragua a
couple years later that Eugene hasenfus
was in that broke open the whole
iran-contra scandal there's the report
from the Banking Committee is supposed
to be coming out in the next couple of
months looking at the relationship
between Barry seal the US government and
Clinton's folks you know there was a
Alex Coburn has done a number of stories
on this company called parking meter
down in Russellville Arkansas that's
cooked up with the Clinton family and
hooked up with Hillary's law firm and
that sort of stuff I mean to me that's a
story people ought to be looking at
I never thought whitewater was much of a
story frankly what I thought was the
story was his but Clinton's buddy Dan
Lassiter the bond broker down there who
was convicted cocaine trafficker who
Clinton pardoned on his way to
Washington Lassiter was a major drug
trafficker and Terry Reid's book claims
Lassiter was part and parcel this whole
thing the question is I guess what can
you do to keep from being hypnotized by
the the media message I don't know how
many some of you saw there was on PBS
ratio on informants what's called snitch
you know that was very heartening to see
because I don't think 10 you
years ago that thing would have stood a
chance in hell of getting on the air
what I'm seeing now is that a lot of
people are finally waking up to the idea
that this drug war has been a fraud
since the get-go and I think you know my
personal opinion is I think the main
purpose of this whole drug war was to
sort of erode civil liberties very
slowly and very gradually and then sort
of push us down push us down the path of
police state and we're pretty close to
that I mean I gotta hand it to him they
did a good job and we've got no Fourth
Amendment left anymore you know we're
all peeing in cups and we're doing all
sorts of things that we our parents
probably would have you know marched in
the streets about so the solution to
that is to read something other than the
daily newspaper and to turn off the TV
news I mean I'm sorry I hate to say that
but that's mind rot you've got to find
alternative sources of information
the question was how can I say in one
can it was a chain reaction or the other
hand say that the drug war receptor
liberally to erode our rights I mean
you're talking about sort of macro
versus micro yeah I I do not give the
CIA that much credit that they can plan
these vast conspiracies down through the
ages and have them work most of them
don't what I did what what I've seen is
you have police groups you have police
lobbying groups you have prison guard
groups they seize opportunities when
they come along the drug war has given
them a lot of opportunities to say okay
now let's lengthen prison sentences why
well because you keep people in jail
longer you need more prison guards let's
build more prisons why well people
people get jobs prison guards get jobs
the police
stay in business we need to fund more
you know we need to give bigger budgets
to the to the correctional facilities so
I'm not saying that this is all very
conscious but I don't think anybody sat
around a room in 1974 and said okay by
1995 we're going to have X amount of
Americans locked up and under parole
supervision I don't think they mind you
know I think they like that but I don't
think it was a conscious effort I think
it's just one bad idea after another bad
idea
compounded with a stupid idea compounded
with a really stupid idea and and here
we are the question is what happened to
Manuel Noriega since he was our man in
Panama for so many years what happened
in Auriga is that I don't think it had
anything to do with the fact that he was
a drug trafficker because we knew that
for years what it had to do with was
what's going to happen at the end of
this year which is when control the
Panama Canal reverses the Panamanians
what that if you read the New York Times
story the seymour hersh wrote back in
June of 1986 that exposed Noriega
publicly as a drug trafficker
longer there's a very telling phrases in
it all unsourced naturally you know
unattributed comments the high-ranking
government officials but they talk about
how they're nervous that Noriega has
become unreliable and with control of
the Panama Canal reverting to the
Panamanian government in ways that point
25 years they were very nervous of the
idea of having somebody as quote-unquote
unstable as Noriega running the country
at that point and I think I was a
well-founded fear I mean you've got a
major drug trafficker controlling the
major you know maritime Thur away I
could see the CIA being nervous about
getting cut out of the business frankly
but but that was that was I think that's
what Nuria the whole thing with Noriega
was about they wanted him out of there
because they wanted somebody that they
could control a little more closely in
power in Panama when the canal gets
reverted back well what Noriega had done
was sort of create the international
banking center for drug money and that
was his part part of it Nicaragua was
nothing ever than just a transshipment
point Central America was never anything
more than a transshipment point you know
it's Colombia and Peru and Bolivia were
the producers and the planes needed a
place to refuel that's all Central
America ever was the banking was all
done in Panama the question relates to
the fact that the other newspapers
didn't do anything about this story for
a while and then after I wrote it they
came after me the turning point that
made it decided to pursue the story was
the fact that it had gotten out over the
internet and people were calling them up
saying why don't you have the story in
your newspaper you know I don't think
the subject matter frightened the major
media as much as the fact that a little
newspaper North in northern California
was able to set the national agenda for
once and people were marching in the
streets they were holding hearings in
Washington they were demanding
congressional hearings you had john
deutsch the CIA director go down on that
surreal trip down south central to
convince everybody that everything was
oh
okay and he and all of this was
happening without the big media being
involved in it at all
and the reason that happened was because
we had an outlet we had the web and
people of the Mercury News did a
fantastic job on this website and so
news was marching on without them and
there was a there's a professor at the
University of Wisconsin has just done a
paper on the whole Dark Alliance thing
and her thesis is that this story was
shut down more because of how it got out
than what it actually said that it was a
it was an attempt by the major media to
regain control of the Internet and to
suggest that unless they're the ones
that are putting it out it's unreliable
which I think you see a lot of stories
that the mainstream press gladly
promotes you can't believe anything you
read on the Internet folks it's all
Kooks it's all conspiracy theorists and
there are there are I mean I'd be the
first to admit there a lot of them out
there but it's not all false but the
idea that we're being taught is unless
it's got our name on it you can't
believe it so they retain control of the
means of communications anyway The
Washington Times came out first the New
York Times came out second the only
Times came out third and they started
getting nervous
because you know there's a phenomenon in
media that we all know it's called
piling on and they started seeing
themselves getting piled on and they
sent me back down to Central America two
more times to do more reporting and I
came back with stories or even more
outrageous than what I was put in the
newspaper the first time and they were
faced with a situation of now we're
accusing Oliver north of being involved
in drug trafficking now we're accusing
the Justice Department of being part and
parcel of this Jesus we got beat up over
accusing a couple of CIA agents about
being involved in this what the hell's
going to happen now and they actually
said ad memos saying you know if we run
these stories there is going to be a
firestorm of criticism so I think they
took the easy way out the easy way out
was not to go ahead with the story it
was to back off the story
but they had a problem because the story
was true and it isn't every day you're
confronted with how to take a dive on a
true story so they spent several months
honestly literally because I was getting
these drafts back and forth trying to
figure out how to say well we don't
support the story even though we we know
it's true and if you go back and you
read the editors this is the editors
column you'll see that the great
difficulty he had trying to find a way
to take a dive on this thing and he
ended up talking about gray areas it
should have been explored a little more
and and subtleties that we should have
you know we should have not brushed over
so lightly without disclosing the fact
that this series had originally been
four parts and they cut it to three
parts because nobody reads four part
series anymore so that was why that was
one reason the other reason was you know
one of the things you learn very quickly
when you get into journalism is that
there's a lot of companies safety in
numbers editors don't like being out
there on a limb all by themselves I mean
I remember very clearly going to press
conferences coming back writing a story
sending it in a my editor calling up and
saying well gee this is what ap wrote or
we just The Chronicle just move their
story and that's not what the Chronicle
wrote I said fine good and I said no no
no we got it we got to make it the same
we don't want to be different we don't
want to have our story being different
than everybody else's and so what you
saw what they were seeing at the mercury
was the big three newspapers suddenly on
one side of the fence and they're all
out there by themselves that just panic
the hell on them so you know you have to
understand newspaper mentality to
understand it a little bit but yeah it's
not it's not too hard to understand
cowardice either and I think a lot of
times a lot of that was they were just
scared as hell to go go ahead to the
store at me they called me up at home
three months two months after I turned
in my last four stories and said we're
going to write a column saying you know
we're not going ahead with this
and that's why I jumped in the car and
drove up there and I said what the hell
is going on and I got all these mealy
mouth answers
you know she's gray areas subtleties
yeah one thing or another but I said
tell me one thing that's wrong in the
story and nobody could have her points
alone and today to this day nobody's
ever said that there's a factual error
in that story whether the question was
yeah the editors are one thing what
about the readers who cares about the
readers honestly the readers don't run
the newspaper
believe me the newspaper office was
flooded with calls and with emails and
the newspaper to their credit printed a
bunch of them calling the most cowardly
thing that ever seen but in the long run
the readers are you know they don't run
the place and really you know that's the
thing that's the thing to understand
about the newspaper markets these days
you folks really don't matter you don't
have any choice what else are you going
to read and the editors know it you know
I used to work when I started in this
business we had two newspapers in town
where I worked in Cincinnati and we were
deathly afraid that if we sat on a story
for 24 hours the Cincinnati Enquirer was
going to put it in the paper we're going
to look like dopes so we're going to
recover and stuff up or go like we were
protecting somebody so we would put
stuff in the paper without thinking
about it sometimes but we got in the
paper now we sit on stuff for months
who's going to find out about any of if
somebody found out about it what are
they going to do I mean that's the big
danger that that everybody is sort of
missed these one newspaper towns you got
no choice you've got no choice on
television television is not going to do
it I mean they're down filming animals
at the zoo
that was Gary Webb on Dark Alliance the
CIA crack cocaine connection he spoke in
Eugene Oregon in January 1999 Gary Webb
a Pulitzer prize-winning journalist
created a sensation when he broke the
story in the San Jose Mercury News
linking the CIA to crack cocaine
trafficking in Los Angeles the media
establishment immediately lashed back
the CIA denounced him his own paper
criticized him and then demoted him from
the prestigious Sacramento Bureau to
Cupertino he resigned from the Mercury
News shortly thereafter Gary Webb
committed suicide on December 10th 2004
he was 49 this program is produced by
alternative radio an independent weekly
series AR has produced a series of
programs on the CIA with Alfred McCoy
Peter Dale Scott Philip Agee and many
others to access our complete catalogue
go to our website alternative radio dot
org again our website alternative radio
dot o-r-g to place a credit card order
for Gary Webb on Dark Alliance call us
toll free at
Matt Lauer back recorded the program
Tonya Lowen Dorf produced the program
I'm David bar Samuel thank you for
listening